Coordinate Me ❭ MAY 2024 India is a federal republic comprising 28 states and 8 union territories. The states and union territories are further subdivided into districts and smaller administrative divisions. The states are self-governing administrative divisions, each having a state government. The governing powers of the states are shared between the state government and the union government. The union territories are directly governed by the union government though some of the union territories have their own territorial government with certain autonomy. The framework for the states and union territories were established by the Constitution of India, which came into effect on 26 January 1950. As per the Indian Constitution, the power to demarcate states and union territories in India is solely reserved with the Parliament of India, which can form new states/union territories, separate/merge territories from/to an existing state or convert states to union territories or vice versa. After the Indian Rebellion of 1857, the British Crown took over the administration of India from the rule of the British East India Company through the Government of India Act 1858. During the British Raj, India was a complex political entity consisting of various imperial divisions and states and territories of varying autonomy. It was made up of two types of territory: British India and native Princely States. Apart from the provinces directly ruled territories of the Crown, there were 584 constituent states with suzerainty over 175 princely states was exercised by the central government of British India under the viceroy in the name of the British Crown and the remaining states were dependents of the provincial governments of British India under a governor, lieutenant-governor, or chief commissioner. In 1907, there were seven major and three minor provinces within the boundaries of present-day India, which were ruled by a Governor, Lieutenant-Governor or a Chief Commissioner on behalf of the Emperor of India. In addition, there were two semi-autonomous imperial structures called agencies, Rajputana and Central India, which had an Agent to the Governor-General (AGG) functioning as the Emperor's representative to all the states in the agency. The states of Baroda, Kashmir and Jammu, Nizamate of Hyderabad and Kingdom of Mysore were neither part of a province nor an agency and had direct relations with the Crown through the Governor General of India. In 1911, the capital of India was shifted from Calcutta to Delhi, which resulted in the creation of a special province of Delhi from the existing Punjab province, administered by a special commissioner. In March 1912, Bihar and Orissa was split as a new province from Bengal. In 1919, the fourth Government of India was enacted by the British Parliament. The act introduced provision for majority of the members to the legislatures of the provinces to be democratically elected. All provinces were elevated to governorship and there were eight governor's provinces apart from the three chief commissioner's provinces of Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and Delhi. The Chamber of Princes was established by Emperor George V in 1920 as a consequence of the act, thus creating more agencies with representative members who could voice out their opinions to the Viceroy of India directly. Additional imperial agencies were established in the subsequent years: Punjab States, Madras States, Deccan States Agency and Kolhapur Residency, Western India and Gujarat States Agency and Baroda Residency, Eastern States and Gwalior Residency. In 1935, the British Parliament enacted the Government of India Act which granted more autonomy to the Indian provinces. The act introduced provisions for the provincial legislatures to propagate its own laws in certain subjects without the ascent of the governor-general. The act also created the office of a Premier in each province who functioned as the new head of government and was responsible to the provincial legislature. Bengal, Madras and Bombay presidencies were officially styled as provinces and new provinces of Orissa and Sind were created from Bihar and Bombay respectively. After the Indian Independence Act in 1947, the Indian Empire was dissolved along with the Imperial Legislative Council and the Chamber of Princes and the Union of India was consequently established when the provinces of erstwhile British Raj and princely states were integrated into the Indian Union. The old provinces largely remained the same with the princely states who acceded mostly absorbed into the existing provinces of the union while a few were organized into separate provinces. In 1950, after the adoption of the Constitution of India, these became part of the Republic of India with the constitution classifying the states into four categories. On 1 July 1954, Bilaspur was merged with Himachal Pradesh and Chandernagore, a former enclave of French India was incorporated into West Bengal in 1955. In 1953, Andhra state was created from the northern districts of Madras state, following the Andhra movement demanding a separate state for the Telugus. In July 1954, Portuguese exclave of Dadra and Nagar Haveli was taken over by pro-India forces and became the Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli state. In November 1954, the French enclaves of Pondichéry, Karikal, Yanaon and Mahé were transferred to India. In 1956, the States Reorganisation Act was passed, which re-organized the country into 14 states and six union territories. As a result of the act: Following the Mahagujarat movement, Bombay state was split into Gujarat and Maharashtra on 1 May 1960 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act. Goa, Daman and Diu was established as a union territory, following the liberation of Goa and Daman and Diu and from Portuguese and accession of Daman and Diu in 1961. Pondicherry was formed as a union territory following the de-jure transfer of French enclaves in India in 1962. On 1 December 1963, Nagaland was divided as a new state from Assam. The Punjabi Suba movement, which sought a separate Punjabi-speaking state, resulted in the Punjab Reorganisation Act of 1966, which created the state of Haryana and the union territory of Chandigarh with the transfer of the northern districts of Punjab to Himachal Pradesh. Madras state was renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1969. Himachal Pradesh was elevated to statehood in 1970. The north-eastern states of Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura were established in January 1972. Mysore State was renamed Karnataka in 1973. On 26 April 1975, Sikkim became the 22nd state after the 1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum which resulted in the Kingdom of Sikkim acceding to India. In February 1987, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram were established as new states. In May 1987, Goa achieved statehood with the northern exclaves of Daman and Diu becoming a separate union territory.