 The states and union territories are further subdivided into districts and smaller administrative divisions. The states are self-governing administrative divisions, each having a state government. The governing powers of the states are shared between the state government and the union government. The union territories are directly governed by the union government though some of the union territories have their own territorial government with certain autonomy. In March 1912, Bihar and Orissa was split as a new province from Bengal. In 1919, the fourth Government of India was enacted by the British Parliament. The act introduced provision for majority of the members to the legislatures of the provinces to be democratically elected. All provinces were elevated to governorship and there were eight governor's provinces apart from the three chief commissioner's provinces of Ajmer-Merwara, Coorg and Delhi. In 1950, after the adoption of the Constitution of India, these became part of the Republic of India with the constitution classifying the states into four categories. In July 1954, Portuguese exclave of Dadra and Nagar Haveli was taken over by pro-India forces and became the Free Dadra and Nagar Haveli state. In November 1954, the French enclaves of Pondichéry, Karikal, Yanaon and Mahé were transferred to India. Goa, Daman and Diu was established as a union territory, following the liberation of Goa and Daman and Diu and from Portuguese and accession of Daman and Diu in 1961. On 1 December 1963, Nagaland was divided as a new state from Assam. Madras state was renamed as Tamil Nadu in 1969. Himachal Pradesh was elevated to statehood in 1970. The north-eastern states of Manipur, Meghalaya and Tripura were established in January 1972. Mysore State was renamed Karnataka in 1973. On 26 April 1975, Sikkim became the 22nd state after the 1975 Sikkimese monarchy referendum which resulted in the Kingdom of Sikkim acceding to India. In February 1987, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram were established as new states.